Roger, would you give us a little bit of background, kind of how you grew up and how you got interested
initially in science fiction?
How I grew up, while I was first born.
Yes, my father had been interested in science fiction from the days of Gernsback with amazing
stories.
And one of the first presents that I got that I remember getting was a complete set at the
time of the old Ace Double novels.
Golly, I must have been seven or eight years old at the time.
And I read those abadly and then I went on to other things.
I went on to Childhoods End by Arthur C. Clark and a Mirror for Observers by Edgar Pangborn.
And I really liked it.
In fact, I like both of them.
And I like science fiction so much that I tended to read science fiction in those years
and not other types of fiction.
Other people may have been reading Tarzan or whatever.
But I would read only science fiction, principally science fiction by Poole Anderson as I mentioned
off of C. Clark and so on.
And I just grew to love it.
I think I still have a list somewhere of every science fiction book that I read during my
teen years.
And then I think I was in my early 20s when I got the idea after reading some anthologies
that maybe I could do.
An anthology possibly as good as anybody else.
So the first couple that I got together from magazines clipping a story here, that I liked
the story there, the first couple were rejected.
And then I met Sam Moskowitz and he and I did an anthology together called Alien Worlds
for Paperback Library.
That did well in fact.
And they signed a second anthology entitled Invasion of the Robots.
Neither of those two built Sam's name directly.
And apparently if I remember correctly that's the way he wanted it.
But subsequent to those two, Sam and I went on to do several directly.
Then I worked with a fine gentleman named Dick Gadaia who is now director of publicity for
ABC Television in New York.
We did all three or four possibly as many as five together.
And if I remember correctly all of those anthologies were of reprinted material.
I started to branch out on my own doing anthologies on a solo basis principally commissioning
original stories by well-known authors and beginning authors.
And I as it turned out could have access to the authors directly perhaps a little more
than Sam or Vic did.
So we didn't part company so much in a very unfriendly way.
We parted company in a friendly way.
We went off in different directions.
And I don't accept for epoch with Bob Silverberg and spine chillers for double day with Howard
Goldsmith.
I don't believe, oh yes, in saving worlds with Virginia Kidd.
I have not done any anthologies with those three exceptions with anybody else.
I've worked principally on a solo editor basis for ten years now.
And in that period of ten years, oh, including novels, collections, one author, collections
and anthologies I've done over a hundred books.
The main reason I wanted to talk to you is that you have been a very prolific editor
and I wanted to take the chance to explore how one sets up an anthology.
How do you get the idea?
Of course you can't answer how you get the idea.
But how the idea gestates and then how you approach publishers with the idea, how you
line the stories, that sort of thing.
Could you give us a sketch of how that's done?
Let me use an anthology entitled Future City.
I originally did it for Trident Press, which was a division assignment at Houston.
Then it went into paperback through pocketbooks.
I got to know the editor there at the time, Bernard Shirkliffe, who I believe is now with
Warner paperback books.
I said to Bernie, and by that time I had built up a credit list of enough reprint and a few
isolated original anthologies that I could send him some of these examples.
And he liked what he saw and he said, well, what would you like to do?
He said, are there themes that we'd like to cover, urban development or whatever?
And I said, well, why don't we do an anthology based upon the theme of the city of the future
and what the destiny of the city is going to be?
And he liked it and I sent him a page or two proposal.
We talked a couple more times by phone and to my surprise and pleasure they sent me a
good contract.
And then as I started to develop the anthology, so most original anthologies, even around
a theme, are somewhat hodgepodgey.
And as good as Epoch was, maybe, which I did with Bob Silverberg, it still is a collection
of diverse stories by diverse writers on a variety of themes.
And I wanted future cities, I got into it to have a central cohesion that you don't
always find even in themed anthologies.
So what we did was I designed it as though, in a sense, it were a kind of episodic novel
written by 15 or 20 different people.
Each chapter was a story written by 15 or 20 different people.
And as the anthology started out, the story or stories were reasonably optimistic or at
least not unduly negative.
And then as the anthology progressed, we have a chronological and psychological dissipation,
if you will.
And the stories became increasingly pessimistic.
And the last story involves the world blowing up and all cities going into dust.
So we start out optimistically, progressed to martyrily pessimistic, progressed to a story
which ended with no hope.
And so there you have a cohesion that just most anthologies original or otherwise do not
have.
And it was a lot more fun to do and more artistically challenging because you're handing out assignments
as it were to 15, 20 authors.
And how much do you guide the author in terms of having the author fit the story into where
that story would fit in the anthology?
And of course, I got in a number of stories.
At that time, I got in hundreds of stories on an unsolicited basis.
And for this anthology, one or two or three were quite good.
And there I had the luxury of reading the story first and finding out where it fit.
But normally with original, all new anthologies where you assign the stories, it's a little
difficult.
So there was a little bit of trial and error.
But Ted Sturgeon did a review, I believe it was for amazing stories, I could be wrong,
in which he said that this was probably one of the best, if not the best anthology that
I had ever done.
But of course, I don't necessarily do an anthology.
I do a novel because I am the one person writing that book.
But I'm simply in effect a kind of hub of the wheel and the writers are the spokes and
it all works together because we're working in it together.
So I consider Future City to be really a terrific book.
And I'd say that without ego, because I was only in a sense, a minor part of it, the writers
wrote it.
And that book also included poems and included some extremely outspoken stories, some extremely
violent stories.
And so there was a good cross section of styles, but chronologically and psychologically, the
anthology assumes that the city is a dead quote thing, unquote, and the stories proceeded
to out of that viewpoint.
You mentioned that one way you can look at this is as a novel.
Did you, have you ever attempted to write stories yourself or still plan to?
Oh, I sold a story to Bob Silverberg for New Dimension Spore.
It's interesting.
It's so totally avant-garde with sentence structure and the way the type is set on the
stage.
It's rather bizarre.
I was somewhat influenced by so many stories that I bought from Barry Malisberg.
I think I, and Barry claims that I bought more stories from him than any other editor,
more wordage, including novels.
And his stories tend to be often bizarre in the best sense of the term as a Picasso painting
might be considered bizarre if compared with another painter's more traditional work.
So this story was totally different from what people had expected of me and from me, and
it got a lot of good recognition.
And then I did several stories for my own anthologies, which is not as nepotistic or
incestuous as you might think, because what I did was I would send the story that I had
written to the publisher and said, look, is this good enough to include?
If it isn't, I don't think either of it should touch it with the proverbial ten foot pole.
And in three or four cases where I did stories from my own anthologies, the publisher said,
fine, let's use it.
So I did use it.
But as far as my own writing now, I'm principally writing nonfiction, and that nonfiction is
principally comprised of interviews with TV and movie stars, with politicians, with,
for example, in October, I'm going to England and I'm going to be interviewing Sir John
Gil Good, Sir Ralph Richardson, Sir Lawrence Olivier, and so on, people of that caliber
and quality in the acting field.
And so most of my writing is in the area of personality profiling slash interviewing.
I'm presently editor-in-chief of a new national magazine.
I don't want this to be a commercial, but I'm trying to ask your question in terms of
my own writing now.
I'm editor-in-chief of a new national magazine entitled Person to Person, which the publisher
is bringing out to compete with people.
And the sole reason for that magazine's existence is over the past 21 years that I've been interviewing
people, and I started interviewing celebrities, if you will, long before I got into science
fiction and have now continued with it, now that I'm principally out of science fiction.
The magazine, the litany of complaints that I've heard over the last 20, 21 years has
been really pretty bad.
The average journalist may well consider the average celebrity to be fair game, and so many
magazines, even others which should not be named for print or for telecast or broadcast,
other magazines do not have an unbending philosophy of editorial integrity.
They feel it is all right to apparently misquote a star.
They feel it is all right to tack on a scandal-ridden, misleading headline, and Person to Person
is geared toward real integrity and journalism, checking material through a star.
And this leads to the point that I am writing a bulk of all the material that appears, at
least in the first several issues of Person to Person, because I'm rather pink-headed
about how it should be done.
I feel the style should be of a certain type, the depth, if you will, the interview should
be always consistent, little of anything that is superficial.
I'm writing, oh, golly, 64-page magazine.
I must be writing 40 to 45 pages of it.
Other writers include Armie Archard, who is a columnist for Daily Variety, and interviews
a number of the film stars prior to the Academy Awards broadcast each year.
So I'm doing that writing.
Four years ago I wrote a novel, rather like, oh, I guess you could say, in the Jonathan
Livingston Seagull genre, and that was called Soaring.
That was strictly a work of fiction.
I've written biographies of Nancy Reagan for Simon and Schuster back in 76, biographies
of Pat and Shirley Boone, collections of interviews that I've done, and I'm also getting into,
I hope, pretty fair novelizations of different TV shows.
I just finished something based upon the spin-off of Happy Days, Journey Love to Chauchy.
I'm finishing now a Facts of Life novelization.
I've also done tie-ins, although not novelizations, with Dukes of Hazard and Fantasy Island and so on.
Sounds like you don't get bored.
I don't, and I'll tell you, I'm also, and I can't name them yet, I've just been appointed,
and I hope I'm using the right title.
If it's inaccurate, don't kill me, but it amounts to the same thing in any event.
Entertainment editor for one of the oldest newspaper syndication services in the country,
beginning in a month or two, and I have the contract literally here, and I'm signing it this weekend.
By September, October, we're going to be putting together a packet of entertainment-oriented
materials, columns, articles, etc., and sending that to subscribing newspapers around the country,
with the notion that if you buy this packet, you don't have to buy a column from this service,
this from another.
It's going to be a complete entertainment package.
It's going to be called person to person, and once again, it's going to have the editorial philosophy
that every word is true.
Every fact is accurate.
If there is something terribly outspoken in it, it's not something that we have made up.
It's something the celebrity has chosen to give.
For example, Linda Blair, who was in the Exorcist and the sequel and a number of other films,
years, some years ago, developed a problem with drugs, and that somewhat hampered her career,
and she's making a comeback now.
She has never talked about this in-depth before.
So what we're going to be doing is an interview, which I'll be conducting with Linda, perceptively, lovingly,
and hopefully with some attempt to show how she got into this and why she's glad she's out.
In other words, an attempt to do something, hopefully at the depth and the length of a Playboy interview,
and she has never talked about that before.
I would intend it as a kind of message to young people around the country as to the problems of getting involved with drugs.
Was science fiction then just a phase that you passed through?
It was a really long phase. It lasted for ten years.
Was it a good...
Is a phase something that is ten years, a decade long, or is a phase some transitory thing?
I think of a phase as something somebody gets into for a year or two or maybe three, probably never four.
With me, it lasted, if you will, ten years, rather than a phase which involves a mental image of something maybe capricious.
I would say it was a period in my career, not a phase.
Let me, if I can, go back in those days then and ask a couple more questions about being an editor.
When you were editing science fiction anthologies, what kind of audience did you aim for?
Were you trying to please yourself or some commercial stereotype that... or whatever you could aim for?
Well, basically, although some people can fought my judgment, or Bob Silverberg, or Harlan Ellison's, or whoever,
I basically bought stories that I liked.
I basically bought stories that I felt, in some cases, even if I didn't particularly like them,
if they were well written, if they had something to say, if they were something that obviously the author felt sincerely.
I bought it anyway. I bought some stories that I felt were personally, religiously, morally, or whatever, offensive, because I felt they said something worthwhile.
You apparently really got to know the writers, and I gather from what you were telling me about what you're doing now,
you apparently have a talent for acquiring a relationship with a lot of people.
I would assume...
Can I interrupt?
Sure.
Let me use a different word. You don't acquire a relationship.
Right.
Because that implies that you're looking to acquire a relationship.
And if one acquires a relationship, one begins to think of relationships as acquiring a prize, or trophy, or something.
What? Well taken.
I think relationships develop, and what I would say is I am interested in relationships developing beyond purely the professional slash commercial implications.
I.e., I will interview Star, X, Y, or Z. The interview goes very well.
The Star will say, give me a bus. We'll have lunch next week. I'll get the Star a bus. We have lunch next week.
The Star will say, hey, I'd like to get a friend of mine. Boom, boom, boom.
So it leads into that. So that you do not, rather, I enjoy what I'm doing only superficially because of the money,
and only superficially because of the recognition it really is coming quite heavily now.
I enjoy what I'm doing because of people.
One mistake that I made in science fiction, which I am doing anything but making now, is that I conducted so much of my business by phone.
And this man back in New Jersey was always making phone calls and doing this and that.
I was like the unseen entrepreneur, if you will, in the field, and people that didn't meet me tended to wonder what I was like,
and in some cases, not like what they felt I was like.
And however, when you meet people, they will obviously possibly dislike you. On the other hand, they may like you.
And so I feel if I had anything at all to do over in the science fiction field, I would have gone to conventions.
I would have had parties of my own. I would have gotten out there more and mixed with people.
Recently, I became involved with Disney Studios in attending the science fiction convention scene,
and the comic book scene representing them and doing some preparatory work in terms of publicizing Tron.
It was like night and day. Even some authors, three or four, that I met at these conventions,
with whom I had had sometimes vehement arguments over the phone, really boisterous, name-calling bad language,
on their part at least, and I try not to fall into bad language, but I'm sure I even slipped too.
And these are really horrendous arguments. I meet these same people in person. We end up shaking hands.
I even threw a pie in one of their faces. Now that, let me explain that.
There was a Stump the Experts panel at one of the conventions, and I am kind of a movie trivia nut.
So the idea is you're supposed to ask one of the experts a question, which I did.
They didn't have the answer, but they get a chance to ask you a question, and if you don't have the answer,
you don't get a pie in your face, but you also don't get the right to throw a pie in their face.
So I asked the expert a question. He didn't know the answer. He asked me a question.
I knew the answer, and so I got to throw a pie in his face.
So I threw a pie in the face of somebody with whom I had had sometimes vicious arguments over the phone,
and afterwards we went to a party together and were very friendly.
So I think what people don't see in person, or who people don't see in person, they either fear,
or they suspect that person's motives, because all they're hearing is this sometimes intruding voice over the telephone.
Out here, where I'm with celebrities, if you will, day and night, so to speak,
I go to interviews five or six, sometimes seven or eight interviews a week.
Most of them in person. Sometimes they'll come to the house.
I've thrown parties, for example, for a number of people.
I won't use their names because I'm not trying to capitalize on the parties.
They weren't show business parties, but they were parties involving friends,
and I've thrown a half a dozen of those in the past year or so.
And what I'm interested in now are the personal relationships as much as possible.
Was that an answer to your question?
That's a good answer. Yeah. This is enjoyable. This is totally different than I expected.
What now? What did you expect?
No, I expected something great.
It's just I didn't realize you were so deeply involved in the popular entertainment scene.
And this is educational for me. My wife will love it because she's quite interested in this.
Have you ever come out to California to introduce you to a few of the studios?
Okay, I may take you up on that. Believe me.
You mentioned a while ago that when you were buying the science fiction stories,
that you did buy some that you really didn't necessarily approve of,
although you thought other people would like them.
There have been...
No, no, no. I didn't say that I bought them because I thought people would like them.
There can be a wonderful story that we all dislike, but the author has said something worthwhile.
And, you know, there are a number of stories I bought which maybe I liked and nobody else did,
so I didn't necessarily buy a story for people to like them.
I bought stories because I felt they were good and hoped people would like them.
Okay.
There have been critics in the past who have said that you censored things, that sort of thing.
Is that really true or perhaps that's just a convenient word they can bring up because it didn't accept your story?
The find the word for me and you use it.
Censored, to me, would mean that there was material included which was blue lined or cut out or whatever.
The story was used anyway or it was rejected solely for that content and not for literary content, let's say.
That's just my interpretation.
Hello, Kay, I'm not trying to hedge, but I want to think of instances and so forth.
I wish I could be specific. I just remember, you know, reading through the years.
If that's the way you use the word censored, yeah, I guess it would crop up or it did crop up.
But I don't use the word censored so much as exercise personal taste.
Now, I think this question was brought up many years ago.
Yes.
And my response to the author or the interviewer or the other editor or the publisher or whoever it was that were the fans who raised the question was,
all right, let me respond to that with a question.
Would you publish a story?
A wonderfully written, artistically valid, well plotted, believable character, interesting story that drew you into the action and at the end you had to admit that it was just pure dynamite.
Would you, however, publish such a story that accused your mother of being a whore who gave birth to you illegitimately?
And the writer says, no, of course, that would be personally insulting to somebody I love.
I said, for that same reason, I will not publish a story that defames God or Jesus Christ in any way.
Or that defames my country or that defames my parents, if you will.
I would not publish a story for the very same reason.
If I found a story and there's a slight contradiction here thinking back to what I said earlier, I would not.
I said earlier I might publish or I did publish stories that were personally offensive.
It's on a case by case basis.
I might find a story that advocated something, whatever that something was.
It was personally offensive.
But I would not publish a story that ridiculed or that defamed my religion or, frankly, anybody else's because that would be a different type of offensive.
I might agree that a person who advocated something certainly had the freedom to advocate that, and I might not agree with it.
I would publish it anyway if it were a good story.
However, I think that there's too much, and this is another reason why person to person exists,
there's too much negative journalism, there's too much negative fiction where anything goes under the guise of artistic liberty.
I would never advocate general censorship.
Let's say this, I would never advocate institutionalized censorship.
But an editor or a movie director or whatever, they have the right, according to their personal views, to say, well, I like that and I'll publish it, or I like that and I'll produce it or direct it.
Or I don't like it and I won't publish it, and I don't like it and I won't produce it or direct it.
They have that right to guide their project according to their personal tastes.
You would never catch, for example, and I think I am surmising this properly, Alan Alda or Ed Astner producing a movie or a TV show that presented a favorable picture of Ronald Reagan.
They would find that personally offensive.
So are they exercising censorship when they're exercising their own personal tastes?
I don't think so.
Thank you for that answer. That was a hard question for me to ask.
How did my answer sound?
It sounds great.
I know now why, when I said this interview was a surprise, and I'm used to interviewing science fiction authors and they never ask me questions.
They don't make me define my terms.
So this is enjoyable. It doesn't feel like such a one-way street.
Well, don't forget, I am an interviewer too.
You're in trouble tonight.
No, I need to learn a lot.
I'm going to find out about you tonight.
No, before we leave anthologies, I want to ask one more question on that.
Did you discover any new writers?
And if you did, is that kind of a high point of being an editor? I would think it would be.
It really is.
Golly, discover.
I did discover some.
I think a better term with a bulk of the newer writers is that rather than discover them,
I helped, we're using the word properly, augment their careers, or I augmented their careers.
One writer who comes to mind is Steve Gold.
Steve, I think, has said in print and to me personally that I helped propel his career along.
Did I discover, and I'm sure that other editors or anthologists published Steve before I did,
but I gave him, I think, in terms of novels and short stories, a real, his career, rather, a real impetus,
and probably did something to help him.
In Barry Malzberg's case, he certainly was around with Beyond the Apollo and others long before,
well, maybe not so long, but before I came on the scene so energetically,
but I bought more article, not sorry, more short stories and more novels from Barry than any other single editor,
and probably did something major or minor, negligible or significant to help establish him more than he had been.
But, oh, some writers I discovered, Golly, I think there was one writer named J.J. Russ
who wrote a very good story, kind of a story which was a commentary on pornography and striptease artists,
and then there were so many others that I may have bought one story from and maybe didn't buy any others,
and maybe nobody ever heard from them again, so when you say discover a writer,
that implies that you found a Hemingway, or you found another writer of similar stature, an Irving Stone or someone,
and from that moment of beginning, they went on to great things.
I can't honestly say that I was responsible in that way for discovering a writer.
That's how you apply the word discover.
I want to move on now to Laser Books, the laser series which you edited.
How did you get involved in that? How did that get started?
Well, I read in Publishers Weekly an interview with the president of the company,
Hollick when the enterprise is limited, an interview with Larry Heisey,
and he seemed to be suggesting, perhaps between the lines, that they would love to do books
beyond simply the romance field in which they had been until that time and still are a leader,
or a theme leader rather, they tend to millions of books every year.
So I thought I would call up Heisey, and I did, and got through reasonably quickly,
and indicated to him the science fiction field and movies that were coming out that would help
give the popularity of science fiction a real foundation, a continuing foundation.
He said, send me a letter, I'd love to talk to you about it, so I sent him, apparently, a persuasive letter,
and he called me up a few days later, remember at that time I was living in New Jersey,
so it wasn't such a chore to get to New York, it was a two hour or so drive, whether I drove or went by bus,
and he said, I'm really interested, why don't you meet me at bus in such a hotel, so I did,
and we had a further meeting, and then they paid for me to come up to Toronto, Canada,
and I met with their board of directors and all, and their salespeople, it was really a very nice meeting,
so they decided a week or two later to get into science fiction via laser books,
and I've talked with the people, the new people at Harlequin since then, since laser books failed,
and all sorts of post mortems on the situation, but I would say if I have any bitterness,
and somebody observed about me recently that I don't hold any grudges, but I am human,
so there is a residue of bitterness or regret, maybe regret more than bitterness,
is that, well, Harlequin had the money to do the books properly, and when I say money to do the books properly,
publicize them, distribute them, etc. Where it fell short is everything, and this is not a mean criticism of Harlequin,
certainly, in any way. They fell short because every book had to fit into a formula that they developed.
Certain lengths, certain type of story, always a male protagonist, the cover design had to be,
ostensibly at least, always the same design, so it was this formula, and what I found myself facing
was if I had a fair book by a writer that fit the formula, and a really good book by a writer
that was maybe off in one or two, possibly even minor points, I had to buy the book that was fair
and reject the book that was quite good. Perfect case is a writer, golly, I must be getting older's name,
I forget, she's a little female writer, she wrote a book that fit the Harlequin approach to laser books in every way.
Action adventure, upbeat ending, no profanity, no blatant sex, I mean it went right on down the line,
and where it fell short, instead of having the principal protagonist, a guy, it was a woman.
And so therefore it had to be rejected, but it was so good.
And what I got hard and run out of town for you might say is, oh golly, so many of the books are only fair or mediocre,
but that's unfortunately the way it turned out.
So it was Harlequin who's more or less set the editorial policy that you had to follow, who's dictated to you?
Totally, now, again, hindsight not doing anybody one bit of good.
If I had it to do over again, famous words might as well not be fed for all the good they do,
but if I had it to do over again, I would have been much more pigheaded, not only at the beginning, but later,
and I would have said, alright, if you want me to buy the mediocre book, fine, but you do really want to be known for a series of mediocre books.
I said because in the science fiction field, interestingly enough, the commercial route is the route that you want to follow,
and that is best achieved if you publish good books, and if you publish books that have some divergence of style and plotting and so forth,
is the science fiction field more than the western field, more than the detective or mystery field, responds negatively to the routine and the pedestrian and the predictable.
It may work in the romance field, it may work in, and mind you, your books are great within the limitations of the genre,
but the science fiction genre, by its very nature, is an unfettered genre where you can go to the moon, you can go to the stars,
you can go inside the earth, you can go back in time, you can go forward in time, you can do so many things.
The beauty of the genre is that you have no real limitations in that respect, so what you want to do is superimpose a formula of limitations on an unformulized novel genre.
I said it's going to be death eventually, but frankly it was a good contract, they were exceptionally nice people, and it was a very enticing situation that I really would not duplicate again.
If a publisher, Harlequin or whoever, and I were to touch again, I would want virtually total editorial autonomy within previously agreed parameters.
There has to be parameters of some sort. I mean no publisher will let, and shouldn't let an editor publish three novels of a thousand pages a piece every month.
I mean there have to be some financial or other limitations, but within those parameters I would want total editorial integrity.
That's the way I would do it again, because that doesn't do any good now.
What kind of audience did the Harlequin people have visualize for the laser series?
That's tougher. I think, well this was covered at one convention I did attend, and I didn't attend very many as I said to my regret.
The fan of science fiction who felt that there was too much quirkiness getting into the genre, there was too much blatant sexuality getting into the genre,
and that the science fiction at its best is the science fiction epitomized by Hugo Gernsback, John W. Campbell.
By the way, let me add parenthetically that John W. Campbell, if he was a dictator, was far more of a censor-wielding dictator than I ever was,
but the science fiction epitomized by Campbell and Gernsback in a more poetic sense by Ray Bradbury and so on,
you would not really catch, you would not really have caught Gernsback or Campbell publishing anything that was even, I guess, remotely sexually suggestive.
You certainly would not catch Ray Bradbury publishing, quote, an offensive story.
And so I felt that I fit more, and I've been compared to, that mold than in any other type, and I just lost track of your question.
Me too. Oh yeah, for what audience? I think you answered it the first time, but what audience was that intended for?
What audience, the classical, ah, okay, perfect example. The audience that responded with such energy to Star Wars, Empire Strikes Back,
close encounters and now ET. Not the audience which would have responded to some dark, perverse, sexually explicit kind of material.
Okay, that series did fail. Did it fail, and I assume that that means financially, did it really lose money or just not make as much money as Harlequin wanted it to?
Well, I'm told, and I have nothing concrete in my hand right now to volitify this in any way, but I was told here, say in Bond and all,
what I was told was this, the Harlequin book sold as well at the time as the average Dahl book and maybe even the average Bees book.
But Harlequin used to 100,000 copies per book, 200,000, maybe even 300,000, was not content with 30, 40, 50,000 copies.
Okay, yeah, Don Walheim told us that I think he said that 30,000 books was what was required for the Dahl book to break even.
So I guess 50,000 is money in his pocket, I mean.
Yes, and also Harlequin did spend a lot of money advertising the books. And you know, it's interesting, a number of the authors, seven, eight, ten, however many,
have told me, subsequent to the suspension of publication of laser books, that over the following six months to a year after the books were suspended,
they were getting royally checks. I think one writer got beyond his original bands, of course.
One writer was surprised to open up an envelope for Harlequin one day and find a check for $1,100.
The authors certainly didn't lose money. Quite a number of the authors got additional royalties, but it just wasn't successful enough for Harlequin to continue.
This is something that's hearsay or it's an impression that's been built up over the years reading about that situation.
But I understand that perhaps the Harlequin people didn't realize that people buy science fiction authors, and they buy some author, a famous author,
they'll buy a Frank Herbert, whereas if they see an unknown, they won't buy that book.
And they assumed that the science fiction people would buy the book just because it was science fiction.
Well, I would tend more to agree, oh, golly, that we're going in three directions there.
We're saying they'll buy the book because it's science fiction, they'll buy the book because it's a name author, and they won't buy the book because it's an unknown author.
Well, I disagree with the fact that they won't buy the book because it's an unknown author. I'll get that out.
An unknown author, Steve Golden, at the time, with his other books was quasi-unknown, and there were so many authors who weren't extremely well-known, such as Ray Nelson, such as others.
And those books sold better than any of the other Harlequin books. Certainly Jerry Pornell sold well, but at the time, he hadn't really had the $100,000 successes that he's having today.
So I would disagree with the fact that if a book is presented well, and this was in those days, maybe today it's a little more sophisticated, a little more selective, better word,
I think if the book looked appealing, the author was not necessarily the deciding factor. Obviously, though, if we'd had Philip K. Dick and Paul Anderson and Bob Silverberg and so on right for us,
the sales would have been better. But even so, I remember talking to Bob Silverberg about one of his books that was with Signet, New American Library.
If I recall properly, it had gone through two printings, and by the end of the second printing had sold the grand total over a period of X number of years, had sold the grand total of 80,000 copies.
Well, that's Bob Silverberg. I doubt the Harlequin would have been satisfied waiting X number of years for a book to sell one half or one third or one quarter of what the average romance book sold in six months.
Okay, I got you just a matter of perspective, really. Okay, tell you what, let me change my tape.
Let me get a glass of water and I will be right back. Okay, great. Thank you.